He got to be a general.
Was he a West Point man? Oh yeah. Most of you, okay,
then all of your ROTC officers, the ones on active
duty stationed here at A&M in the 30s, as far as you
can remember, they were all West Point men. I think
it had been mighty unusual if they weren't. None of
them were originally from A&M?
Well I don't know about others and the other
branches.
Of course we uh
we had the different branches on campus and we
didn't get very closely acquainted with people
outside of our own branches and I'm sure that all of
those that were associated with us in the
artillery branch for Westmoreland. Okay. Now
tell me about these ROTC camps. Well, we went to
Camp Bullis, Texas outside of San Antonio.
Our
other branches of ROTC went to other locations.
The duration was six weeks. We lived a very spartan
military existence. We had long, demanding days.
We were supported by, in my particular
camp, C battery of the 12th Field Artillery, our
horse-drawn outfit from Fort St. Houston.
We function directly under one of the sergeants
and the battery. Of course, we use their
equipment, their horses, their artillery
pieces, caissons, and all.
I'd say that it was quite a fine military training
experience. And you were also in this ROTC camp
with other cadets from other colleges? Yes, a few
other colleges, not very many. What colleges were
they? Oh gosh, it seems to me that we had some people
from Oklahoma State University. I don't remember
others. Nearly everyone there was a Texas A&M.
How'd you get along with these others? Was it a
rivalry? Oh, well, I wouldn't say so beyond the
rivalry you'd have when you're rotated into
leadership positions of platoon sergeant
or battery commander for a day or for an exercise or
whatever.
but of course you didn't have any real authority,
so you were dependent upon the cooperation of
people.
There just weren't any reactionary people in ROTC
in that time, so you got it right off just by having
the cadet position, whatever it was. support and
loyalty pretty well just taken for granted. What
do you mean there weren't any reactionary people?
What do you mean by that? Well of course we now see so
prominently the draft resistors
and activists of one kind or another from
homosexuals to whatever it might be and of course
those things
just weren't accepted during that period of time
and there just wasn't any of it. Right. Everyone
was there to do a job? They were there to do a job.
Anybody that didn't conform
usually didn't stay at Texas A&M very long. So the
people around Texas A&M at that time We're all
pretty much alike. I won a card related to these
things, which you occasionally find student
complaints and uprisings on campus.
There's nearly always some kind of springtime
cause that students get associated with. Since
everybody lived in military outfits, if the
leaders decided that we were going to protest
something, there was a whole lot greater
participation in protests than there would be
now, dispersed.
I remember that in the spring of my senior year that
there was an organized protest,
which was that the cleaners around the campus were
going to raise the price for cleaning and pricing a
pair of pants from 15 cents to 20 cents. That was a
major cause that we had, I think. And did you have a
lot of these causes? I mean, did you have a lot of
protests? No, no, not very many. I remember the
leaders were protesting. Lauderstein was one of
the cleaners then. Youngblood, of course,
they had student employees around each military
outfit that would take up cleaning and pressing
for them to take it in. My gosh, the prices of the
day, as you think about it, They sure do seem low
compared to now. They sure would buy a lot, I know.
The meals in the dining hall, I believe our board
bill was $21 a month. Later reduced to $18 a month.
My goodness. So that's about what you earned as a
student laborer, so I guess the relationship
between the earning power and what you can buy are
about the same as today, but there wasn't much
money around. Now it appears that you feel that the
Corps of Cadets then builds character. Would you
agree with that? Oh, absolutely. Well, I've heard
that said many times before, and I always like to
ask, well, what does that mean? What does it mean
that they build character? Well, the
expectations are fairly plainly expressed.
There is a discipline,
and those that succeed conform and accept the
discipline, the relationship with others, the
standards expressed.
To me, those things are part of character. I think
they shape a person's
standards for living, not only in the military,
but in other aspects too. Do you think that the
Corps had an impact on the fact that you became a
leader? Oh, certainly. Could you explain?
Well, there is no question the reinforcement I
would receive from these
ROTC instructors that I admired so much a little
pat on the back here or there would inspire me to try
to do better.
Here again, the tasks laid out, whatever they
might be, there were certain standards, and if you
performed up to the standards or exceeded them,
you would be reinforced by recognition from the
ROTC instructors. It was very stimulating.
What were your feelings when the Corps was made
voluntary in the 1960s? I was 100% for it. As a
matter of fact, I was a member of the three-person
study committee concerning compulsory ROTC and
COIDS at Texas A&M. Really? Certainly. The Corps
had such an impact on your life. Why would you not
want to have the Corps part of every young man's
life? I would, but I wanted him to make the choice
himself because the times had changed. Even my own
sons didn't choose to go through the ROTC program
for Texas A&M. Though they did enlist in Army
Reserves and put in their careers that way,
Somehow the mood of the country and the young
people had changed and I just don't believe in
forcing people at that age to do something they
don't accept. That's
really peripheral to the main purpose of Texas A&M
and was more peripheral in the 60s than it was in the
30s.
That's
a good point. Often people or journalists,
sometimes scholars, talk about a military
mentality. They put this in quotes. Is there a
military mentality, and if there is, could you
explain it? Well, there is a military mentality, I
believe, but it's not the same today as it was in the
30s. The military mentality changes, too.
There's no question that in the 30s, military
officers had authority that was accepted, and
that military command was authoritarian.
Because the young people that were in the
services, or the older people too, had grown up in a
disciplined environment and families, and they
accepted authority. That's certainly not true
today. There is much more democracy in military
leadership. It's essential that there be, and
there is. There is much more participation in
decisions, and leadership is a lot harder today
than it was in those days, where authority was just
taken for granted and accepted.
I'd say that the military mentality
is dominated by the fact that in a military
organization, a person is expected to be willing
to make the ultimate sacrifice to give up his life
for whatever purpose he is committed to. And
that's a dominant thing. You certainly have to be
disciplined to do that in spite of being beset by
all the fears and doubts that one has for a cause and
upon demand by leaders that you respect. You will
accept great danger and sacrifice to the point of
giving up your life for your associates and for
your country. That's part of a military
mentality. And is that still believed? Is that
still believed today in your opinion? That giving
up your life? I believe it is by a substantial
portion of the population.
What about the military? What about the
population of the military?
Well, I think that this permeates the military,
but I don't think that it does to the same degree
that it is generally accepted as it was a few years
ago. I see.
that there are other motives for participating in
the military. I deplore the fact that we're trying
to buy people
and that compensation seems to be a dominant
factor right now. Because I don't believe that you
get the same sort of a zeal and determination
same sort of performance, people that are
motivated that way as they are just because
basically. By higher salaries, huh? Yeah, by
higher salaries or whatever, just because
basically they are there during the time, during
the period to protect the freedom of the country.
I sure believe everybody has an obligation to do
that.
I would like to see every young person in the United
States be called on to make some sacrifice to
protect the freedom of the country. Now that we're
on this, would you include women in that?
Absolutely, I would now. There's no question my
attitude has changed over that time based upon my
experience with women in the Armed Forces. Well,
could you describe that now that we're on this
topic? How has it changed? Why did it change?
I was associated with some young women in the Army
Reserve Organization. They were just
outstanding soldiers.
They performed mighty well in the tasks assigned
to them. Which type of tasks? Well, in most cases
these were administrative type of activities.
There were officers in? Well, officers and
non-commissioned officers.
My experience with the young women in the Army
Reserves was quite favorable.
I'm sure that is a part of their equal rights that a
very high proportion of the females in this
country are willing to take up whatever
sacrifices there might be. It was a mighty big
shock to me when I got into France and I found women
that
couldn't be trusted to actually, of course,
ambush somewhere a soldier. served as snipers.
That was a real shock to me that women would be
combatants in some way like that. Were these
German women? No, they were French women that had
been associated with the German army and that
really were supporters of the German people in one
way or another. And they were taking shots at you?
Oh, hell yes. These women cleared down to the coast
of France and all where we went in. We learned
pretty soon that my generation would trust women.
They would never think of it as that. We learned
pretty soon that you couldn't trust the women in
that area. Many of them had collaborated with the
Germans.
had been, had accepted the Nazi cause and couldn't
be trusted. Of course, after the American army
went through, the native
French people dealt with them very harshly.
Shaved their heads and in some way identified
those that collaborated with the Germans. They
were ostracized and worse, But anyway, the
Russians of course were using women during that
period in their armed forces. There was some in the
German military, I guess some exposure along in
World War II, in the combat phase. And this changed
your ideas in the 1930s. That was the beginning of
the change. That started to change. Then the
primary thing that changed my attitude about
women in the armed forces was in the Army Reserves,
I found them in a lot of the organizations.
I'd have to say that after the draft was released
and we were recruiting under the voluntary army
concept that we got more responsible people and
women than we did men. As a matter of fact, the
standard for recruitment were higher. Really?
Oh, sure. Still are. Still are. It takes higher
qualifications to enlist in the army or army
reserves as far as I know today for females than it
does for men. Okay, I wasn't aware of that. Oh yeah,
well you have to make higher scores on the
intelligence test to have a higher status.
Really? Sure. Doesn't that seem like
discrimination? Well it is. Sure it is.
As far as I know, in the last three or four years,
they haven't changed that. We still have to make
our scores. You can't take them in category four on
their intelligence status as you could men.
They've got to be more highly qualified. So on the
average, the ones we recruited during the
Voluntary Army period were more intelligent,
more responsible. more dependable. So I
developed a lot of respect for young women in our
forces. You know, our sexual standards have
changed a little bit, and we didn't worry so much.
First, we would have been mighty embarrassed to
people my age on the latrine facilities in the
vicinity and that sort of thing, but that's just
changed now.
As far as I know, in several years of experience, we
didn't have any improper sexual incidents with
women integrated into our military outfits. Not
any at all.
What were your ideas about women in the service
back in the 1930s when you were here in the Corps?
Well, we never even considered it. It wasn't even,
well, that would be the farthest thing from our
minds. Nobody expected
women to participate. I guess the study during the
time, two years I served on this committee,
studying compulsory ROTC and coeds at A&M, that I
developed a little bit of an attitude then,
because even then, for at West Point, women could
go take graduate
work. It's
a changing pattern in the country.
In other words, then you see A&M as a flexible
institution. Certainly.
And you see that as a positive aspect? Certainly,
certainly. At that time, that was such an
emotional question that the committee members'
names were kept real. secret and as far as I know it
never even been revealed to this day but the
integration of women in the Texas A&M proceeded
exactly according to the recommendations of that
committee. Archie Flowers over at the College of
Veteran Medicine was chairman of it.
Who else is on that committee? Oh there's one
gentleman and uh there were just three of us the
other gentleman was in mechanical engineering
I'll declare as All right.
Getting back to the Corps,
when you, in 1942, went into the military on active
duty, what did you find was the opinion of other
officers toward Texas A&M officers? Well
actually I went in in August of 1941 to
serve a year.
But you went in April of 1942. No, I got into the
artillery in April of 1942, but I was already in the
Army when it was the Pearl Harbor time. Oh okay,
then can you tell me, can you tell me, okay well
we'll talk about that next, that you went in in
1941. Let's talk, let's answer this first
question now about the opinion of others when you
went in in 1941 toward A&M officers. Oh, the A&M
officers had a fine reputation in the Army. Well
accepted. Good performers. They do today. I'm
very proud of that. Even from the West Pointers? Oh
yes. No snobbery or? Well, not very much. Of
course, There's always, there's no question
during those days that the officers from the
military academy had an age in being considered
for promotions.
They deserved it. Why do you say that? Well, they
were better. You think a West Point graduate is
better than an Aggie graduate? I think for early
performance, In the Army? Yes. That's his whole
purpose during four years and previous training.
Now, after two or three years, things even up, and
the person can perform according to his own
ability. But there's no question in my mind that
the training in the U.S. Military Academy is
better for a lieutenant to immediately perform in
the active army than Texas A&M. Sure.
Just by the nature of the military institution?
Well of course, that's what that's the, that's the
whole purpose of it there, and they accomplished
that purpose, but I don't think advantage lasts
over two or three years. You put the two people
together and after two or three years, A person
from Texas A&M may be better qualified than a
person from the U.S. Military Academy. They will
have gone to service schools. They will have had
experience. Those things will have evened up the
early advantage that the Military Academy person
has. There wasn't feelings that, well, you guys
are just from A&M and we're from West Point or
something? You thought you were well accepted
then? Oh, no question. I was right the first
battery appointment I had was in the same military
outfit that had served with us on ROTC camp. I was in
there with a young man named Smith, a fine officer
from the military academy. We were battery
officers together. There's no question we had
mutual respect.
My god, he was a fine officer. Didn't get promoted
from second lieutenant to first lieutenant until
his whole class got promoted. It just happened
that the second infantry division was an old line
division. They caddied to form three other
divisions, but those of us that stayed with the
division always said, well, they kept the best
ones in the division. They sent the worst ones out.
So anyhow, he was a second lieutenant just like I
was and didn't get promoted until his whole class
got promoted to old West Point class. What about
other ROTC officers from other institutions?
Most institutions at early 1940s had ROTC, of
course, and what did what did they think of A&M, or
how did you get along with those people? Well, I'd
have to say we had a superior attitude
as commissioned officers in the Army about most
ROTC graduates.
We thought we were better than they were, and in a
lot of cases we were. However, there were many
officers in my own artillery battalion from
Oklahoma State University. Actually, after a
short time, I think we had an early advantage. Just
like I'd say that the Military Academy people let
over us because of the emphasis on ROTC Texas A&M.
But I'd say that advantage would fade away in six
months or something in the active Army. We had
fine, fine officers that obtained their ROTC
commissions from Oklahoma State
University. Okay, let's talk about education
here at A&M. We've talked about the Corps for an
hour or so. Of course the main reason you were here
was education. Let's talk about education. Who
were instructors that had an influence on you?
Well here again I'd say that all of
those that I had a great respect for the
instructors that I was associated
with. the faculty members in the College of
Agriculture Texas A&M had a genuine interest in
their students at that time. It was a very good
association. I'm proud that I think that still
exists today. Even with more students? Oh sure. I
think our student-teacher ratio has not been
altered all that much. Sure. But D.W. Williams was
head of the Animal Science Department, a
gentleman who's still living today. The baby's 88
years old.
Great respect for him, admired him, still do. A.K.
Mikey, instructor in the Animal Science
Department, who somehow took some special liking
to me and got me associated with research early.
When I was a sophomore,
he was working on beef, on meat tenderness
research with Dr. Sylvia Culver, who's still
alive today. A.K. Mackie died a couple years ago.
These were fine, fine people. Gee, they would
honor me by asking me to make trips with them
sometime.
got me involved in academic activities that were
carrying on.
I'm
mighty proud of the people I was associated with in
classes. Dr. Charles N. Sheppardson was Dean of
Agriculture. Well, E.J. Kyle was when I was a
student, later Charles Sheppardson.
They were people to be admired.